With LoRA, the goal was to find
an efficient way to update the weights of
the model without having to train
every single parameter again.
There are also additive methods within
PEFT that aim to improve model performance
without changing the weights at all.
In this video, you'll explore a second
parameter efficient fine tuning method
called prompt tuning.
Now, prompt tuning sounds a bit
like prompt engineering, but
they are quite different from each other.
With prompt engineering,
you work on the language of your
prompt to get the completion you want.
This could be as simple as trying
different words or phrases or
more complex, like including examples for
one or Few-shot Inference.
The goal is to help the model
understand the nature of
the task you're asking it to carry out and
to generate a better completion.
However, there are some
limitations to prompt engineering,
as it can require a lot of manual effort
to write and try different prompts.
You're also limited by the length of the
context window, and at the end of the day,
you may still not achieve
the performance you need for your task.
With prompt tuning, you add additional
trainable tokens to your prompt and
leave it up to the supervised learning
process to determine their optimal values.
The set of trainable tokens
is called a soft prompt, and
it gets prepended to embedding vectors
that represent your input text.
The soft prompt vectors have the same
length as the embedding vectors of
the language tokens.
And including somewhere between 20 and
100 virtual tokens can be sufficient for
good performance.
The tokens that represent natural
language are hard in the sense that they
each correspond to a fixed location
in the embedding vector space.
However, the soft prompts are not fixed
discrete words of natural language.
Instead, you can think of them as
virtual tokens that can take on any
value within the continuous
multidimensional embedding space.
And through supervised learning,
the model learns the values for
these virtual tokens that maximize
performance for a given task.
In full fine tuning, the training data
set consists of input prompts and
output completions or labels.
The weights of the large language model
are updated during supervised learning.
In contrast with prompt tuning,
the weights of the large language model
are frozen and
the underlying model does not get updated.
Instead, the embedding vectors of
the soft prompt gets updated over time to
optimize the model's
completion of the prompt.
Prompt tuning is a very parameter
efficient strategy because only a few
parameters are being trained.
In contrast with the millions to billions
of parameters in full fine tuning,
similar to what you saw with LoRA.
You can train a different set of
soft prompts for each task and
then easily swap them
out at inference time.
You can train a set of soft prompts for
one task and a different set for another.
To use them for inference,
you prepend your input prompt with
the learned tokens to switch to another
task, you simply change the soft prompt.
Soft prompts are very small on disk, so
this kind of fine tuning is
extremely efficient and flexible.
You'll notice the same LLM is used for
all tasks,
all you have to do is switch out
the soft prompts at inference time.
So how well does prompt tuning perform?
In the original paper,
Exploring the Method by Brian Lester and
collaborators at Google.
The authors compared prompt tuning
to several other methods for
a range of model sizes.
In this figure from the paper, you can
see the Model size on the X axis and
the SuperGLUE score on the Y axis.
This is the evaluation benchmark
you learned about earlier this
week that grades model performance on
a number of different language tasks.
The red line shows the scores for
models that were created through
full fine tuning on a single task.
While the orange line shows the score for
models created using
multitask fine tuning.
The green line shows the performance
of prompt tuning and finally,
the blue line shows scores for
prompt engineering only.
As you can see, prompt tuning doesn't
perform as well as full fine tuning for
smaller LLMs.
However, as the model size increases, so
does the performance of prompt tuning.
And once models have around
10 billion parameters,
prompt tuning can be as effective
as full fine tuning and
offers a significant boost in performance
over prompt engineering alone.
One potential issue to consider is
the interpretability of learned virtual
tokens.
Remember, because the soft prompt
tokens can take any value within
the continuous embedding vector space.
The trained tokens don't correspond
to any known token, word, or
phrase in the vocabulary of the LLM.
However, an analysis of the nearest
neighbor tokens to the soft prompt
location shows that they form
tight semantic clusters.
In other words, the words closest to the
soft prompt tokens have similar meanings.
The words identified usually have
some meaning related to the task,
suggesting that the prompts
are learning word like representations.
You explored two PEFT methods in this
lesson LoRA, which uses rank decomposition
matrices to update the model
parameters in an efficient way.
And Prompt Tuning, where trainable
tokens are added to your prompt and
the model weights are left untouched.
Both methods enable you to fine
tune models with the potential for
improved performance on your tasks
while using much less compute than full
fine tuning methods.
LoRA is broadly used in practice because
of the comparable performance to full fine
tuning for many tasks and data sets,
and you'll get to try it out for
yourself in this week's lab.
So congratulations on making
it to the end of week 2.
Let's recap what you've seen earlier this
week, Mike walked you through how to
adapt a foundation model through
a process called instruction fine-tuning.
Along the way,
you saw some of the prompt templates and
data sets that were used
to train the FLAN-T5 model.
You also saw how to use evaluation
metrics and benchmarks such as ROUGE and
HELM to measure success
during model finetuning.
In practice instruction finetuning
has proven very effective and
useful across a wide range of natural
language use cases and tasks.
With just a few hundred examples,
you can fine tune a model to your
specific task, which is truly amazing.
Next, you saw how parameter
efficient fine tuning, or PEFT,
can reduce the amount of compute
required to finetune a model.
You learned about two methods you can
use for this LoRA and Prompt Tuning.
By the way you can also combine LoRA with
the quantization techniques you learned
about in week 1 to further
reduce your memory footprint.
This is known as QLoRA in practice,
PEFT is used heavily to minimize
compute and memory resources.
And ultimately reducing the cost of fine
tuning, allowing you to make the most
of your compute budget and
speed up your development process.